	Gregory Presser
Food Culture in Nineteenth Century New York City
In a world split up into country, race, ethnicity, and religion; there is one major component across all borders that unites even the strongest of foes, food. All people need to eat in order to survive, but eating has become more than just a necessary part of human survival. People have evolved into a species who enjoy eating and creating dishes to please our senses. This is true for every culture; whether born in Germany or Italy each culture has developed their own cultural dishes that they have come to enjoy. Today New York City is one of the food capitals of the United States and the greater world because of food culture. New York City became one of the food capitals of the country because, of its high population of immigrants who came to the United States keeping only the clothing on their backs and the memory of their recipe books.
The main trait of a food capital is the diverse food selection that can be found in the city. However; in today’s food market all types of food can be found in globally. What defines a food capital is the history of food in a city. Immigrants are what create that history; those who cross the globe in order to escape political discourse, flee from religious persecution, or simply hope to escape poverty. Regardless of the reason they came, when they arrived they were, to a certain extent, home sick. They taught their children native culture and raised them not as American parents did, but as they would have home in Germany or Italy. They created their own communities to surround their children with other similar children. Most of all they fed their children a slice, a piece, a cut, or a sip of their home across the Atlantic. Food capitals are not built and they are not born; food capitals are normal cities that evolved into something much bigger, with a deeper historical meaning, that also have some of the best food in the entire world. 
New York City becoming a food capital is mostly based on luck. Manhattan being a natural harbor allowed for immigrants who came to America to naturally arrive in Manhattan, and having little money many immigrants stayed in the city to halt travel expenses. This coupled with the fact that New York was originally New Amsterdam, a tolerant Dutch state, already laid the groundwork for New York to accept immigrants and for them to feel more comfortable. Specifically German, Italian, Chinese, Jewish, and Irish Immigrants all had a profound effect on New York City Food Culture. 
	Germans began coming to North American long before the United States had its freedom from Great Britain. During the colonial era many Germans came to the new world because of poor farm ownership opportunities, religious persecution against: Lutherans, German Reformed, Moravians, Mennonites, and German Catholics, as well as forced military service. These early German immigrants originally settled in Upstate New York. 
	In the 19th century more Germans start to immigrate to New York City. Many Germans came to the states due to the revolutions in the German states occurring in 1848. The United States took in many political refugees known as the Forty Eighters. And once again many of these immigrants settled in the New York City area, more specifically in Little Germany, otherwise known as the Lower East Side. 
	When the Germans came to America they brought their wonderful taste for food with them. The German diet still heavily influences the American diet to this day. Some of the many things they brought overseas were the Hamburger, Hot Dog, and Pretzel while also heavily influencing the beer industry.
	The word hamburger comes from the city of its origin Hamburg, one of the largest cities in Germany. The hamburger, a ground beef patty with two bread buns surrounding it, has a confusing origin story; no one truly knows who invented in or who brought it to the United States. One of the stories states that Frank and Charles Menches two street vendors in Hamburg New York ran out of pork in their sandwiches and switched to beef at the fair, inventing the hamburger. This version of the story states that the Hamburger did not originate in Hamburg German rather Hamburg New York. This shows how the roots of food can be found in immigrants who slightly changed home recipes and created a masterpiece; putting New York City one step closer to becoming a food Capital. 
	The Hot Dog or a Frankfurter, a sausage traditionally grilled or steamed put in between a sliced bun, was brought from Germany and was served to American’s by street vendors. One of the first Hot Dogs in America originated in New York City at Coney Island in 1867. A man named Charles Feltman had a stand at Coney Island where he would boil sausages and have a compartment for buns. Hot Dogs a now iconic American food was originally a German immigrants creation that he brought with him from his old home to his new home. 
	The Pretzel, another German invention of Soft Dough twisted into knots, was a early 20th century creation by Germany and brought over by German immigrants. Pretzels soon became popular in big cities such as New York City and eventually evolved in the United States to the hard Pretzel snacks we see in snack bags. Pretzels are a fine example of a type of food brought over by immigrants which we changed to create a different type of food. 
	Beer is another industry German American immigrants became supreme. These immigrants saw the need for beer in American culture and dominated the market. The German immigrants brought bigger and more widespread portions of beer across the United States and in New York City. German immigrants understood that beer was imperfect in the United States and strived to fix it for economic gain, but also caused the beer industry to grow dramatically.
	Another influential group of immigrants who came to the United States are the Italians. The were not too many colonial Italians who came to the new world, regardless that Amerigo Vespucci was the first to find the new world. However, there were some exceptions the first Italian to reside in America was Pietro Cesare Alberti who arrived in 1635 and settled in now New York, as well as the Fona family who settled in now Upstate New York in the mid 18th Century.
Another more vibrant set of Italian immigrants came to the United States in the mid 19th century. More specifically around the year 1861, due to the political issue in Italy many Italian fled italy for the United States. Most of the immigrants came from Southern Italy because the Italian government was using most of their resources on building an industrialized Northern Italy. However; this left the Southern parts of Italy in disarray; causing a mass immigration to the United States. When the Italian people came to The United States many of them stayed in New York City, and found refuge in their own communities that they built called “Little Italies” These neighborhoods exist across New York City and can be found in Manhattan near Mulberry Street, Belmont, Bensonhurst, Howard Beach and Rosebank. 
Because of the influx of Italian in the New York CIty system the city begins to see a influx in popularity for Italian style foods in New York City. Some of the major foods brought over by Italian immigrants include Pizza and spaghetti, meatballs, and ices; however, other prominent foods such as Espresso, Nutella, and Tiramisu were originally Italian foods imported from Italy in the mid to late 20th century.
Pizza was invented in the 18th Century Italy as a flatbread with tomato sauce and melted cheese. In the late 19th Century pizza was introduced to the United States by Italian peddlers who held metal wash tubs of pizza on their heads selling pizza at two cents a slice. 
Another famous American dish with Italian origins is spaghetti and meatballs. spaghetti and meatballs is modeled after various Italian dishes that combine pastas such as rigatoni with meats such as salami. Italian immigrants in New York City invented spaghetti and meatballs and the first recipe for it was recognized by The National Pasta Association in 1920. 
Another great dish created by Italians are ices. Ferdinand Palmo, an American Italian immigrant, came to the United States of America and opened his own shop where he sold various authentic Italian food. One of these foods being ices, a sweetened frozen dessert usually made with fruit or other artificial flavors. 
Later in the mid to late 20th Century we see many more culinary achievements brought to America and New York City by the Italian. Espresso, invented in the early 20th century and brought to America half a century later changed the way Americans and New Yorkers drink coffee. Nutella and Tiramisu were created in Italy in the mid 20th century and brought to America where they both quickly took off in American food culture. 
The Italians are another prime example of a group of immigrants who came to America and began to share with native New Yorkers their culture through food. This caused an uproar in American food culture. New Yorkers loved the food that was brought over and decided to make it their own. This is why with the Germans they modified the Pretzel, making it harder, and with the Italians they soon modified pizza, making it more of a finger food. This is why New York city is one of the food capitals of the globe. The city has an amazing deep history entrenched in food breathing life into every bite taken of food across the city. However, there is more to food culture than just the Italians and the Germans; restaurants are another key feature to American food culture. 
A major factor in naming a city a food capital is restaurants. Restaurants are the sources for authentic cultural food. One may be able to buy all the ingredients to make ravioli and make it, but the experience will be very different than going to an italian immigrant’s restaurant where he makes you ravioli just like his parents made for him back home in Italy. The experience is more authentic and more vivid. While one may think that this experience is synonymous to going to a vender on coney island where a german immigrant is selling pretzels, they are vastly different. Restaurants have a sense of stability to them, vendors move from block to block, neighborhood to neighborhood, or disappear altogether in a blink of an eye. Restaurants however, are generally are stationary, you eat there, and do not close without everyone knowing about them. Their scale allows for a level of stability that stands do not allow. For these reasons restaurants are key factors in New York City’s food culture. 
Restaurants, being part of New York City’s food culture have a some sort of cultural background to them. During the 19th century many different types of restaurants were created some were English styled, other German, and others were Italian. All of them contributed to New York Cities food culture and helped make it the food capital that it has become today. 
Restaurants, being such an important part of New York City food culture, were not started solely in love of food; rather, it was the economic benefit they offered that created the restaurants. In the 19th century London had many restaurants, steak houses, that served a fixed menu every day. New York City being the original port city of America had the most English businessman funneling through the city on a daily basis. At that time the only way these alien businessman could get food was to make it themselves in the hotel or go to the hotel bar and dine. These hotels, flooded with Englishman, had diners that did not serve fixed menus or have food to the buisnessmans liking. This is when restaurants started being built, modeled after the restaurants of most English merchants home, London. 
The first true restaurant in New York City and greater America is the famous steak house Delmonico’s. Styled after English restaurants this steak house made by two Swiss immigrants John and Peter Delmonico and their nephew Lorenzo. Delmonico is a special restaurant due to the amount of signature dishes it has as well as invented. The restaurant created the famous Delmonico steak, an assortment of ribeye, named after the restaurant, popularized eggs benedict,a sandwich of english muffin, bacon, and eggs, as well as Baked Alaska, an ice cream meringue dessert. This was just the stepping stone for restaurants in New York City soon after many different restaurants started throughout the city in with all different styles of food created by all different immigrant groups. One of those immigrant groups being the German Americans. 
The German immigrants upon seeing the path taken by the Delmonicos began pathing their own paths it the restaurant business. In the 19th century German immigrants created many restaurants three of those being Peter Luger Steakhouse, Lüchow’s, and  Killmeyer’s Old Bavaria Inn as German American restaurants. 
Peter Luger Steakhouse was established in Brooklyn in 1887 by Peter Luger. Peter Luger created this restaurant in order to spread his native country’s culture while also flipping a profit. In his restaurant Peter Luger specialized in the T-bone steak, beef cut from the short loin, but also included other german foods such as Hamburgers. What is interesting about this establishment is that he takes foods from other cultures such as home fries, french fries, and onion rings; all not of American nor German ethnicity they are from all over. This just shows how New York City is the melting pot of food culture; all different types of foods make there way into many different restaurants. 	
Lüchow’s another famous German restaurant was built in 1882 in the East Village. Lüchow’s unlike Peter Luger’s establishment was more German by nature, with some dishes including Wiener Schnitzel, knockwurst and Sauerkraut, and Bratwurst. Lüchow’s is another example of a restaurant that used its German roots and the restaurant style spreading German food across the United States. 
The final German restaurant is called Killmeyer’s Old Bavaria Inn, created in Staten Island during the year 1859. This establishment was German at heart but like Peter Luger had other cultures mixed in, serving German style steak, wiener schnitzel, sauerbraten, as well as a type of caramelized bacon pizza called pflammküchen.This pizza is another example of a mixed culture dish, where the Germans make their own take on pizza expanding the food culture of the New York City. 
The Italian American Immigrants also upon seeing the popularity of restaurants began creating their own restaurants in their culture’s style. Moretti and Martinelli are two famous Italian restaurants in 19th century New York City.
Moretti was established in Manhattan in the 1850s by Italian immigrants that hail from Vicenza. The establishment soon became well known for its fine cooking, especially its risotto, a native Italian dish. This restaurant gained so much popularity attracting many famous guests for a meal as well as sponsors such as Tammany Hall and the Academy of Music. This restaurant by popularising itself caused an uproar for Italian food, benefiting New York City’s overall food culture. 
A rival restaurant to Moretti was Martinelli another Italian restaurant started in the 1880s in Manhattan. Martinelli, while serving essentially the same food, also became a popular restaurant hosting many lavish events such as: alumni banquets, military fraternities, and high level political organizations. While these two restaurants alone created major amounts of interest together they sparked New York’s interest for Italian food across the city. 
New York City is one of food capitals of the nation and the entire world, and it did not achieve this feat overnight. Over the course of centuries of immigrants coming to America doing what they love, making food, in order to make a living caused a major uproar in food culture across the city. A wise man once compared history to a puzzle; in the puzzle of New York Cities food culture, the immigrants are the border pieces guiding and keeping the puzzle together. The centerpieces are the restaurants and food stands that are guided by the immigrants with true heart for making food. Food culture can be made from the bottom down; a coalition between the natives and the immigrants. The immigrants need to be willing to make and sell the food that was from their homeland, and the natives need to want a change in cuisine. This way the city naturally brings a richer food culture for its inhabitants and for the rest of the world to marvel at. 
